---
layout: post
title: A Multi-method Study of Consumer Behavior - Towards a Better Understanding of the Consumer’s Perspective On Online Grocery Shopping
tags: [project]
---

Across the world online grocery shopping has been growing for the past decade, with China, South Korea and Great Britain leading in terms of the industry’s popularity. In Germany, on the contrary, online grocery shopping is only adopted in individual cases. The objective of this study is to develop a research framework that explains the key drivers of the intention to use online grocery shopping of German consumers. The proposed framework incorporates Technology Acceptance Model 3 predictors and several external variables such as Product Involvement, Trust and E-Shopping Quality. Its composition is based on literature analysis and three qualitative workshops. For the framework evaluation, the data collected from 213 participants is analysed using structural equation modeling. The study strongly supports the proposed framework with job relevance, e-shopping quality, perceptions of external control and enjoyment being the strongest predictors of behavioral intention to use online grocery shopping.

The grocery industry is the largest industry worldwide in terms of revenue, turnover, and customers. Unlike other retailing sectors, online grocery shopping has not yet found its way into the mass market, and consumers are often reluctant to adopt it. The results of this work indicate that the reason for this is that customer needs are not being satisfied. One of the most fundamental problems is that there are many areas throughout Germany that are outside the range of the existing delivery services. Furthermore, I find that the integration of online grocery shopping into daily life is challenging, due to insufficient product assortments, delivery flexibility, and reliability, as well as the consumers’ critical assessment of product freshness. By conducting two qualitative studies I find that unplanned, happy discoveries when purchasing groceries are not encouraged and that room for serendipity is largely missing. Through elaborating positive and negative customer experiences and their influences on the intention to use online grocery shopping, I contribute to the understanding of why or why not consumers adopt online grocery shopping. The last part of this work coincidentally fell into the outbreak of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. I discover the resulting coronavirus pandemic as a positive and negative amplifier for the building of a behavioral intention to use online grocery shopping. This work not only advances the understanding of consumer need-information in digital grocery business models literature. By applying research diaries, it also makes valuable contributions to the methodological portfolio for customer-centric innovation management.

The online grocery sector is considered to have great economic potential, but the expected growth, especially in Germany, has not materialized. Recent research has shown that there is a gap between what customers need and what current online grocery business models provide. To investigate how online grocery business models can successfully deliver value to their customers, this paper examines the structure of current business models using the business model patterns approach. I systematically analyze 40 currently operating online grocery business models in the German market and extract 60 business model patterns. As the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak appeared during the period of this research, I derive 19 additional crisis-driven business model patterns. To structure the data, I develop a taxonomy of online grocery business model patterns and a morphological box scheme. This makes it possible for practitioners to find the pertinent patterns to systematically innovate with their business models. Finally, in light of the unfulfilled requirements explored in recent research, my study details the business model dimensions that need to be adjusted for businesses to reach long and short-term success.

<a href="/dissertation.pdf" target="_blank"> </a>